---
title: 'Craving'
categories: [mindfulness, technology]
---
> There is a hole in my heart dug deep by advertising and envy and a desire to see a thing that is new and different and beautiful. A place within me that is empty, and that I want to fill it up. The hole makes me think electronics can help. And of course, they can.
> 
> They make the world easier and more enjoyable. They boost productivity and provide entertainment and information and sometimes even status. At least for a while. At least until they are obsolete. At least until they are garbage.
> 
> Electronics are our talismans that ward off the spiritual vacuum of modernity; gilt in Gorilla Glass and cadmium. And in them we find entertainment in lieu of happiness, and exchanges in lieu of actual connections.
> 
> And, oh, I am guilty. I am guilty. I am guilty.
> 
> I feel that way too. More than most, probably. I'm forever wanting something new. Something I've never seen before, that no one else has. Something that will be both an extension and expression of my person. Something that will take me away from the world I actually live in and let me immerse myself in another. Something that will let me see more details, take better pictures, do more at once, work smarter, run faster, live longer.
> 
> [Mat Honan at Gizmodo][1]  
via [Daring Fireball][2]  

If this doesn't describe the dissatisfaction of being on tech's cutting edge, I don't know what does. I've struggled with this part of technology my whole life.

   [1]: http://gizmodo.com/5875243/
   [2]: http://daringfireball.net/linked/2012/01/11/honan-ces