---
title: 'Fan Heaven'
categories: [mindfulness]
tags: [parenting]
---
We recently moved into a new house with our year-old son. He's just at that age where he is starting to notice things, and among the things he noticed first were the ceiling fans in each room.

At some point he even learned their "name" (vvvv!). That's pretty much his first word-object association. Over the last few months we've spent hours walking him through the house while he pointed out the ceiling fans and light fixtures in each room.

**VVVVV!** **VVVVV!!!**

He'll point, first at the fan in the room we're in, then at the next room. We dutifully carry him there so he can see the next fan.

**VVVVV!!**

We look at fans in restaurants. We look at fans in stores. We look at fans in the doctor's office. 

**VVVVV!**

I was surprised to notice that just about everyone seems to have ceiling fans out here. I'd never thought to go looking for them before.

So yesterday on an otherwise normal trip to Lowe's I decided to take him through the fan and lighting department.

{{ theme:partial src="image" title="Fan Heaven" file="fan-heaven.jpg" }}

For the next few moments, my son was in heaven.

**VVVVV!** **VVVVV!!** **VVVVV!!!**

There is no doubt in my mind that if someone can find heaven in the Lowe's lighting department, we can find it anywhere.

For one moment I saw a mundane corner of the world through year-old eyes, and realized that the world is a pretty awesome place - even in Lowe's. 

> The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
>
> *John Milton, Paradise Lost*